


X Co. Action Plan
FS_BM Partners




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Algebra 1 is a gateway to high school graduation and, therefore, economic mobility in America. Disproportionately, it has been a barrier for Black and Latinx students and students experiencing poverty. This pernicious inequity has persisted for generations. [1]  Many attempts to address it have been made, but weakly-class size reductions,  teacher training, tracking, de-tracking, federal and state grant programs. With Covid 19, the disparities have widened. There is a solution: high-dosage tutoring. X, and its predecessor Match Education, originated the idea in
2004-embed one or two hours of tutoring within the regular school day. It was a bold idea public schools in America had done previously. And it worked at Match and under the leadership of its nonprofit spinoff, X Co. Six randomized controlled trials of X’s core math intervention prove that when it is delivered correctly, following standards set by X Co. over the past 18 years, tutoring embedded in the regular school day can and will lead to the most significant gains in student achievement of any intervention ever rigorously studied in U.S. high schools, according to the University of Chicago. Well-trained and supported tutors, aligning their instruction to the student's classroom experience, will both remediate and accelerate student learning. At its highest fidelity, X's model closes up to two and a half years of the opportunity gap between students of color and white students; an average of 1-2 years is generally expected. With careful attention to the details, and to fidelity, building off its success directly partnering with districts, X Co.is expanding nationally with a model that equips districts themselves to implement high-dosage tutoring. With a world-class engineering team now an integral part of  X Co.can deliver software solutions as well as program design, training and monitoring services to scale its impact nationwide, and to ensure that tutoring is done right. If tutoring is done right, schools should, can, and will reimagine learning and will redesign to change their ways-to build the schedule, the budgets and the approach to human capital that will lift students and will break the generations of inequity in our public schools. That is the promise and vision of X’s widespread impact Action Plan. The core of our plan will be our cohort model. We will generate market demand and then select, over three years, twenty U.S. public school districts to join us in designing their pathways to embed tutoring as a core element of their budgets, schedules and approach to human capital. These districts will represent the range of U.S. districts by size, but all will have a concentration of schools serving high percentages of students experiencing poverty. In these districts, we will co-design a program that will deliver the key elements of X’s direct services model, run by the districts and focused on helping students clear the Algebra 1 bar that is a gateway to high school graduation. And once we demonstrate that any district can do this, we will open up the future of redesigning America's schools to work for kids.
 

PROBLEM AND TARGET POPULATION
"It is doubtful that any child may reasonably be expected to succeed in life
if he is denied the opportunity of an education. Such an opportunity, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a right which must be made available to all on equal terms."
-U.S. Supreme Court, Brown v. Board of Education, 1954
In America, fair and equal access to education is considered a fundamental right. The reality, however, is that the American public education system persistently and systemically underserves students of color and students from lower income communities. More than half a century after Brown v. Board of Education, our schools continue to be resourced unequally along racial lines. While most white students will attend a high school that offers calculus,
two-thirds of Blacks will not. Majority-white schools receive, on average, $2,000 more in funding per pupil than do majority-Black schools. [2]
With each year of schooling, the effects of these racial inequities are compounded. Across this country, Black and Latinx students will enter high school having experienced eight years of under-resourced education. There will be a severe mismatch between where they and their peers arrive at school academically and what teachers are required to teach. Under-resourced schools that serve Black and Latinx students and disproportionately large populations of students experiencing poverty are unable to provide individualized education to students who are performing behind grade level. Even our nation's strongest teachers do not have the ability to consistently provide targeted, personalized instructional support. Schools promote most students to the next grade level regardless of student skill level, which simply pushes the issue down the road and further compounds the disconnect between a student's level and what is being taught in their classroom. As a result, the Black and White opportunity gap progressively widens in America as students advance, with few ideas-let alone evidence-of what would work to close it. The picture appears bleak; the pandemic has made it more pronounced. There is a strategic leverage point and solution that will help to address this issue: X’s model of tutoring for algebra.
We should listen to the students who are being most adversely affected by these structural challenges. 80% of students who dropout of high school cite course failures as their top reason and Algebra 1 is the course most failed. Only 20% of students who fail Algebra 1 in ninth grade will go on to receive a high school diploma, compared to 85% of those who pass the course. Because of this and the cascading consequences that include economic mobility, the late Bob Moses rightfully identified disparate racial outcomes in algebra as not just an issue in educational equality, but a civil rights issue. [1]
X Co.has demonstrated that even at the high school level it is Not Too Late [3] to reverse the cumulative impacts of systemic racism in our education system. A single year of X’s Algebra 1 intervention, delivered with careful attention to adhering to the standards of high-dosage tutoring that X Co.(and its predecessor, Match) originated and built upon, has been rigorously shown to drastically reduce the overall opportunity gap in mathematics (cutting one half the gap in one year), to improve performance in all academic subjects (cutting the class failure rate in math in half and in other subjects by more than 25%), and to improve high school graduation rates (reducing dropout rates by 25%). X Co.has demonstrated that embedding high-dosage tutoring into the school day, as part of the student's school schedule that complements their regular math course, is the most equitable way of providing tutoring. Students are already in school and are not forced to make the economic choice of receiving tutoring, working to support their family, or participating in extracurricular activities that compete for their time after school. Embedding tutoring into public schools extends it through the diversity of our society and can prioritize students who are experiencing poverty, who are disproportionately Black and Latinx. From our research, we know this gateway to high school graduation-passing Algebra 1-can be unlocked for students, and from our evidence, we know how to unlock it.
Through direct, frequent tutoring by an adult who is chosen for their ability to connect with youth, students are able to gain the foundational and prerequisite skills to access the Algebra 1 curriculum. Too few districts provide this type of personalization, and as a result we continue to watch generations of youth, disproportionately Black and Latinx,
 

left behind. If we get this right, the numbers of students we can affect are staggering: there are approximately four million students enrolled in Algebra 1 in US public schools, half of whom are at risk of failing Algebra 1 and thereby increasing their likelihood of dropping out of high school by a factor of four. We intend to lift the trajectory of one million students in Algebra 1 who attend high-poverty schools, most of whom are students of color. [4]
The challenge now is how to best and most rapidly scale this model while maintaining fidelity, efficacy, and impact not only in Algebra 1, but more broadly in middle years math and ultimately tutoring across the key leverage points in K-12 education (early literacy and middle-years math).
VISION FOR IMPACT AT SCALE
X’s vision is for high-dosage tutoring to be a part of the fabric of America's public education system-in twenty districts by the end of the Action Plan, and in one hundred districts within ten years. In this vision, personalized instruction will become a normal part of what a student could expect in their school day and, as a result, all students would reap the benefits of mastering middle grade mathematics (algebra proficiency by grade 9) and early literacy (reading proficiency by grade 3). This new education system would give students access to support that can catch up and accelerate their skills, thereby enabling students who are far behind to participate fully, at grade level, in their core classes. School schedules would reflect this integrated approach, teachers would be trained to collaborate with tutors, and there would be a new opportunity across the nation for educated, caring adults to serve as tutors and contribute to the pipeline of talent ready and able to serve students.
X Co. envisions a world where K-12 students-especially low-income Black and Latinx students-have equitable access to economic and social mobility. To achieve this, X Co.seeks to establish high-dosage, in-school-day math tutoring (SHDT) as an integrated part of a student's
K-12 education, a proven response to inequity, built to endure on the bedrock of public funding.
Evidence clearly demonstrates that high school graduation is a critical determinant of economic mobility and that successful completion of Algebra 1 is a leading indicator for graduation. It also puts students on a pathway to Calculus by Grade 12, which puts them on a potential college path toward an engineering degree-and the potential of lucrative STEM-related job opportunities that can lead to additional economic mobility. The STEM workforce looks overwhelmingly white, with 66% of STEM workers with a bachelor's degree or higher who are white and just under 15% of STEM workers with a bachelor's degree or higher who are Black or Latinx. (NSF, National Science Board, August 2021). The world will look markedly different with Black and Latinx engineers as a significant part of the STEM workforce. [1]
By embedding X’s proven approach to high-dosage tutoring into the school day (SHDT), the public education system can vastly improve outcomes in Algebra 1 and, ultimately, the long-term economic upward mobility of students experiencing poverty. [5]
PROGRAM MODEL
X Co. began as an evidence-based, personalized tutoring solution designed to support students who may be struggling with math or academics in general, to give them the confidence and academic strength to graduate high school, and continue to postsecondary pursuit of their dreams. X’s motto, imbued with our organizational values, is that "students don't care how much you know until they know how much you care."[6] Central to the success of X’s proven program are these key components: 1) a relationship-based model with small group size for tutoring;
2)	tutors who are trained and provided ongoing support in X’s instructional philosophy of addressing mathematical mindsets, collaborative learning, and critical thinking; and 3) the alignment of the tutoring curriculum and activities with each school's unique context and content sequence. High-quality tutoring is centered on a strong working relationship between the tutor and their students, with a tutor-to-student ratio of 1:2 or 1:3. In each school where X Co. provides its program directly, students attend a daily tutorial period each day, within the regular school day, where they work with their own tutor for personalized math instruction. That tutor is in turn trained and coached
 

by a supervisor. This dedicated period during the school day is in addition to their regular math class. This enables X Co.to meet students where they are in their journey of making sense of math and in solidifying their confidence in and identity of a person who belongs in the math- learning and success space. It augments the work of the school's math teachers and provides a level of personalization that is not possible for a typical teacher's caseload. X Co. integrates into the school with close collaboration between the X Co. team site director and the key players at the school, so that X Co. becomes baked into the program.
This proven model is now being virtualized. In response to COVID, X Co. acquired a technology company that enabled a fully custom and optimized platform for integrated online tutoring. A free online basic training portal was released to the country (May 2021). Technology done well can and will open the door to rapidly scaling X’s program across the nation.
X Co. deploys two variants derived from its Traditional Model: a Blended Model in which students alternate days between working independently on an adaptive software platform and working with their tutor, and an Online model in which the Blended Model is delivered with tutors working remotely, online. The blended and online variants are the most cost effective in terms of student gains per student cost and are now the most common in X Co.cities (about 90% of the schools we serve). The online model has proven to be the most scalable.
For all versions of the model, tutors work with students during the regular course of a school day. Typically, this is for six periods a day. Tutors are identified from a diverse pool of applicants and chosen based on a dozen criteria, including, critically, their ability to connect with the youth X Co.serves. Encouragingly, year after year and city after city, 30-50 percent of tutors hired (and 70 percent of our school site supervisors) are Black or Latinx, providing valuable representation to the youth we serve. Our tutors overwhelmingly tend to stay for their entire year-long commitment, building trust with their students. Each school is overseen by a site director who handles issues of student focus in the tutoring room and communication with school staff, and provides daily feedback and ongoing coaching to the tutors. The tutors and site directors receive both pre-service and on-going training, delivered in recent years entirely online. Central to this training is a focus on effectively keeping students in the zone of proximal development and making sure that the ratio of student-to-tutor working, thinking, writing, and explaining is shifted in the direction of the students, causing the tutor to stay in the role of facilitator.
CHANNEL FOR SCALE
X’s high-dosage, evidence-based model is the gold standard for math tutoring. Today, X Co.delivers its
high-dosage tutoring program as a direct service to urban school districts serving disadvantaged youth. X Co.grew this direct service model from one school in NYC in 2015, serving 140 students, to 60 schools in 2021/22, serving 7000 students (Chicago, DC, NYC, Broward County FL, Charleston SC, Providence RI). Cumulatively, X Co.has been contracted by districts to serve nearly 30,000 students over the last seven years.
Today, X Co.is seeking to develop a channel for scale that will allow its evidence-based approach generated in our direct service model (Engine 1) to rapidly reach the over one million disadvantaged youth enrolled in Algebra 1 who could greatly benefit from it each year [4], through our evidence-informed widespread impact model. These one million young people are at risk of failing Algebra 1 without the strong evidence-based intervention that X Co.has demonstrated since 2004 (including our years at our predecessor organization, Match Education); if they fail, 80% will drop out of high school. [2] While X’s existing direct program will continue to scale, the rate at which it is able to add staffing and scale is limited to roughly 25% in year-over-year growth. X Co.has identified that the best path to more rapid scaling will be through school districts directly implementing their own versions of X’s model, using X’s support to ensure fidelity to the key elements of the model. X Co.has restructured around two engines for fidelity and growth. Engine 1 is our direct services program and model for fidelity, and Engine 2 is our wide-spread impact program and model for growth, as illustrated in Figure 1. These are not independent programs but mutually reinforcing efforts. While Engine 2 grows exponentially to serve far more students, Engine 1 will continue to deliver
 

important learnings from its ongoing R&D; conversely, Engine 2 will contribute key learnings from new contexts as many districts work to implement and adapt the model to their local context.
This Action Plan focuses on the design and development of Engine 2 in order to meet its goals of rapid scalability and widespread impact. Over the next three years, we will test hypotheses that we believe will lead to the solutions that make it possible for districts to implement X’s model with fidelity in the absence of X directly staffing and running these programs. The channel for testing these hypotheses already exists: over the past year, we have been engaged by multiple districts and states outside our direct service model to provide technical assistance to support their efforts to implement high-dosage, in-school tutoring programs. These engagements provide evidence and data to inform how we position and package our model for scale. In parallel, we have developed an online training program (X Co. Coach) under which X’s effective in-person tutor training programs are codified and made asynchronous so as to be broadly available.
Our goal is to serve sets of districts in a cohort model, so that they can co-design and learn from each other. These districts will share certain commitments but vary in characteristics. Each cohort of districts will be internally consistent: that is to say, large urban districts will be grouped together; medium-sized and suburban districts will be together; and rural will be its own cohort. Our focus on equity for under-served students will mean that we will focus each cohort on schools within those districts that are high-poverty and have 50% or more students of color. Over three years, we will bring district cohorts on board at different times. At the end of three years, this format will allow us to demonstrate the promise of X’s proven model informing effective high-dosage tutoring models implemented by partner districts across the spectrum of US public school districts. Over the three year Action Plan period, as described in the "3-Year Goal" section below, we plan a reach of 20 districts and 184 schools that represent the scope of American, high-poverty, public schools (large urban; medium urban/suburban; rural). Entering the cohort will require districts to commit and conform to the basic elements of X’s model illustrated in Figure 2.
Over the three year action period, we anticipate that we will gradually transition the forms of support that we provide to districts in each cohort from more detailed and intensive support to more strategic support at the administrative level. Proving that we can make such a transition will be key to demonstrating the feasibility of this channel to scale. We hypothesize that we will initially be providing a level of support that is not scalable and that this support will be both broad and deep, related to supporting implementations and tutor training at the classroom level and intra-school coordination level. As we learn from our district partners who are implementing these programs (as co-design partners), we believe that we will be able to develop systems, processes, tools, and technology to make the work repeatable and scalable. As we do so, we expect that our engagements with school districts will transition to providing technical support at higher levels of the administrative structure and that this support will become less extensive and less expensive over time. Our belief is that at the end of three years, there will be considerable demand
 

for our services because of the success of our cohort districts, and momentum toward national expansion that builds on the current momentum in K-12 for learning acceleration and tutoring.
Figure 2: Core Elements of X Co.’s Model
While we acknowledge that there are other players offering tutoring solutions to school districts, X Co.is already in a market-leading position. No alternative solution has X’s evidence base, and we set the standards for the tutoring of math in schools. The White House and the US Department of Education have highlighted X’s evidence in both their materials accompanying the President's March 2022 State of the Union Address and their 2021 School Reopening Guidance. Engine 2 has the power to achieve equity, leveling the playing field for marginalized communities to have access to tutoring which typically is the domain of the well-off. In addition, on a parallel track, we will continue innovating in our Engine 1 core model and push out improvements to the field, and we will make organizational adaptations and continue to strengthen our internal capacity to support district partners.
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMIC MODEL
Public funding is the way we want to both provide our direct services, and to grow our widespread impact services. We intend to demonstrate that a cost-effective model for in-school-day math tutoring can be delivered around $1,000 per pupil. This target is important, because it will be an annual amount below the federal Title I allocation per pupil (historically, before the stimulus bills of 2020-2021, about $1000 per pupil). Title I has been a steady source of funding to high-poverty districts for over 55 years. Districts will be able to rely on one single sustainable federal source for their programs. We believe that districts will build these programs into their budgets when they are convinced of their cost-effectiveness. And they will need X’s assistance during the three years in our cohort to solve the myriad issues that will arise, including sourcing and supporting talent and changing schedules, for example.
As for the cost of running a successful tutoring program, currently, our average cost per pupil is about $1,900, but we have models in Broward County, FL and in Providence, RI that are under $1,300 per pupil under variations on our caseload and dosage models. We will run some pilots in Years 1-3 of the Action Plan to test variants on the model we now deliver in our direct service program. We will look to test changes in dosage, caseload, ratio of tutors to students in tutorials, the mix of labor to deliver tutoring, and the offloading of laborious processes to technology tools and AI. Districts in our cohort will benefit as X Co.innovates and tests variations in our model, as the closer we can get to
$1000 per pupil, the easier this fits into district budgets (the typical large US public school district spends between
$15,000 and $20,000 per year, per pupil, on operations overall).
Currently, X’s direct program (Engine 1) is paid for by a combination of district funds (usually federal Title I dollars), federal subsidy through AmeriCorps, private philanthropy, and individual school contributions. To pay for tutoring now, districts for the next three years have even more funding from federal stimulus allocations (ARP, ESSER). Broad demand for X’s offerings already exists. Our plan for Engine 2 is ultimately to fund the work
 

through earned revenue, with districts paying us-again, likely using a part of their Title I allocation (or federal stimulus funds over the near term). First-year participation in a cohort will involve no additional cost for districts who are paying for X Co .services or tools; we hypothesize that making this portion of X’s program free will remove administrative overheads and complications such as procurement processes. Before the end of the first year of each cohort, however, we will ask the districts to pay for continuing services in years two and three. We anticipate they will contribute financially in years 2 and 3, as they continue to receive philanthropic subsidy through X Co. during their three cohort years ( this diminishes over time). After they graduate, they do not receive philanthropic subsidy through X. Our hypothesis is that when they see evidence of X’s effectiveness in pre-launch design and post-launch support, they will be willing to pay. We forecast significant revenue prior to the end of our three year plan (see Table 2 in that section), and this will increase in the year following the action plan, if we are successful. In that fourth year, we anticipate that we will be serving at least thirty districts and three hundred schools that will be contributing revenue on the order of $4.5 million, against direct costs on the order of $6.0 million for our supporting services (not including our forward-looking sales, marketing, and R&D). Economic sustainability on earned revenue alone could come as early as the third year following the action plan.
There is precedent: from 2013-2015, X Co. served Chicago Public Schools completely funded by philanthropy, at no cost to the district. Then, in 2015, the district Board of Education approved a four year contract for X, in which 85% of X’s costs were covered by the district's Title I funds. In 2019, the district approved a renewal, for an additional six years, again with its own Title I funds. Similarly, in Washington DC, private philanthropy from the Clark Foundation started X’s deployment in 2018. Then, in 2020, the District began to add a share, to replace private funds. Moreover, in 2021, individual DC schools also added a share to supplement the district's payments.
Initial evidence of economic feasibility is also emerging from X’s current technical assistance support work. For a New Mexico District, the state is paying X Co.$1,000 per month per school for support (for a total of $22,000 per month for 22 schools). California's Green Dot Public Charter network is paying $215 per tutorial video for X Co.to provide asynchronous tutorial observations and feedback (in which X Co.reviews video recordings of tutorials and debriefs with the Green Dot team each month to inform their tutor professional development programs).
EVIDENCE OF EFFECTIVENESS
X Co.is frequently cited for its substantial evidence of efficacy in the tutoring space for its direct program services. X’s direct service Engine 1 math program has been involved in six randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of its tutoring model since 2013. A seventh RCT was done on X’s direct service literacy program, which is not part of X’s action plan for the next three years. Across these studies, X Co.has generated rigorous evidence of the substantial impact of high-impact tutoring on students' math performance. We have replicated these impacts across studies and demonstrate that these effects persist even when X Co.is implemented through more blended and scalable models. Collectively, this evidence base creates a strong foundation and motivation for the potential efficacy of our Engine 2 model at scale.
Since the 2013-14 academic year, X Co.has implemented its tutoring model in grades nine and ten across the country. The University of Chicago Education Lab partnered with X Co.and the Chicago Public Schools, and the NYC Department of education, to carry out multiple large-scale, randomized controlled trials to understand X’s impact on thousands of Chicago ninth and tenth graders in high-poverty schools. Our early evidence was very strong. That led us to ask more questions-including what are the specific mechanisms that led to these results; and can we change elements of our model to maintain effectiveness, while reducing costs?
●	Results of X’s work in Chicago from 2013-14 (a large scale randomized controlled trial) show that one year of participation improved student math test scores by the equivalent of an extra one year of learning for the typical American high school student; put differently, the effect is close about one-fifth of the national Black-White test score gap in a single year, or one-sixth of a standard deviation (Reardon, 2011).
 

●	Data from the second year of the RCT study (2014-15) replicated these findings, as participation in tutoring for one year improved student math test scores by almost one-half of the Black-White test score gap (the equivalent of an extra two to two and a half years of learning for the typical high school student). Programming during these years also improved math GPA by 0.4 to 0.6 points on a four-point scale, reduced math course failures by 45-60%, and reduced non-math course failures by over 25%. Moreover, there was a suggested 25% reduction in the HS dropout rate (and a 25% or greater increase in the graduation rate), but the data was not yet robust enough to make this last finding statistically significant.
●	A third RCT study in 2015-16 found a statistically significant increase of 0.86 points on math GPA, although implementation barriers in Chicago limited some of the findings from this study.
●	A fourth and fifth RCT study was done of X’s blended model. This was a modification of our design and in the tutor student caseload-a model at 60% of the cost of our initial model. In this model, tutors had four students assigned to them per period; they tutored two "live," while the other two worked on an adaptive practice platform. Students alternated in these modes every other day. For study year one, the U of Chicago reported statistically significant positive effects on math test scores and math course GPA, as well as a decrease in math course failures. More specifically, UC observed an improvement of 0.24 standard deviations on math test scores (1-2 additional years of math learning), an increase of 0.21 points on math course GPA, and a decrease of 20% on math course failures. These findings are on par with the results from the initial study of X’s 2-to-1, non-blended tutoring model in 2013-15. I.e., the blended model was found to be nearly twice as cost-effective as the non-blended model.
●	A sixth randomized controlled trial was conducted by NORC, of X’s online tutoring for the SAT. It, too, showed strong impacts on student SAT math scores (0.41 standard deviations).
In addition, X’s technical assistance work has also been evaluated in several locations. Details on this are in Note [7]. The early evidence strongly promises that X’s expansion into Engine 2 support for districts will be successful.
RACIAL EQUITY
X’s existential mission is to help eliminate the systemic racism that has resulted in Black and Latinx students not having equal access to a quality education. From its founding, X Co. has chosen to work with districts where the student population being served has been over 80 percent (and in some years and schools, 90-100 percent) Black and Latinx.
In order to ensure that its programs would in fact reach these populations, X Co.  made the unprecedented decision that its high-dosage tutoring program would be designed into the regular day of public schools in America-it hadn't happened before. This is a critical element as we strive to nationally and systemically deliver on our mission to address today's inequity in education.
Typically, people think of tutoring as an after-school activity. However, much of the tutoring that occurs after school is an afterthought, for the school, the teachers, and even for the students. After-school tutors come to a scheduled session, not knowing that their student didn't attend school that day, or not knowing their student had a conflict after school with other commitments (extracurricular, family, job). After-school tutoring doesn't connect with teachers, and the tutors don't connect with the teachers' scope and sequence or share timely performance data. For students experiencing poverty, who are disproportionately Black and Latinx in the U.S., tutoring after school or out of school time would have been the least equitable option. In-school tutoring does not compete with family, extracurriculars, job conflicts, or transportation limitations; it is the most equitable placement for tutoring to be scheduled.
Internally, X Co. has a Board committee established to support the organization in our DEIB work. Our goals are to have an organization in which all individual team members feel a strong sense of belonging, a goal which can be supported by effective diversity, equity and inclusion work. We administer the 12 question Gallup poll measuring individual needs, feelings of belonging and support, and disaggregate the data by race, gender, and other identities.
 

We review the data, hold focus groups to flesh out narratives, and take actions as a result. We have an internal task force of interested staff and tutors that meets monthly to promote DEIB initiatives.
X’s widespread impact channel will be focused on high-poverty schools in the same way that X’s direct impact channel has focused on these schools, and the students of color that these schools disproportionately serve. We anticipate that this focus on high-poverty schools will be naturally supported by districts because of the alignment with the availability of Title I funding. (Should the availability of Title I funding not create sufficient alignment with X’s goal of focusing on racial equity and high-poverty schools, then we will additionally incentivize alignment through needs-based discounting of our tools and services.) In order to effectively serve students of color we will continue to co-design our tools and materials with our direct-service students (at least 80 percent of whom are Black or Latinx). This includes our math curriculum which was designed with the students and the tutoring process in mind. It also includes new developments, like our adaptive practice tool, which seek to super-serve these students.
3-	YEAR GOAL
We hypothesize that certain human-powered and technology-supported systems will unlock the channel for scale that we described above. Over the next three years, we plan to demonstrate that these systems can be built out and that they will make it possible for school districts to conform to X’s high-dosage approach scalably (and therefore largely independently), while maintaining fidelity. The primary three-year goal is to surface and test all of the critical hypotheses that underpin the channel for scale. Figure 3 illustrates the key hypotheses in this model as we currently conceive them; all are important, though we assume that the model itself will evolve as elements are tested and new systems are co-designed with district partners. What will be true at the end of three years is that districts will have seen the value of each of these actions, and will be paying for X’s services as a cost-effective addition to their budget for personnel delivering tutoring in their schools.
Figure 3: Hypotheses Supporting X Co.’s Channel for Scale
Hypothesis 1 (H1): Demand for X’s Technical Assistance Services Will Enable Its District Cohort Model
Our action plan builds off the fact that there is an existing strong demand for our technical assistance and quality assurance services. We have won competitive contracts in New Mexico and Chicago in 2021 and 2022, and competitive awards from Rhode Island and Maryland are anticipated shortly. We anticipate that this demand will be sustained in the market given the substantial Federal funding flows towards tutoring and related shifts in awareness about tutoring programs. The cohort model will allow us to demonstrate that the demand is persistent - i.e. to demonstrate that we are able to recruit districts into a cohort model annually, with four to five districts participating in each cohort, and with cohorts persisting for three years, as illustrated in Figure 4. In addition to proving the market demand hypothesis (and hence continuously verifying product-market fit), the cohort model will provide us with customers to test other hypotheses in the model both longitudinally (as districts become more comfortable with the
 

tutoring programs and expand their programs) and iteratively (as new districts join new cohorts each year). Critically, a subset of district cohorts will also be recruited as co-design partners.
The output of the co-design process will be a set of tools and resources (described below) that enable and support SHDT at scale. Having been co-designed to meet the needs of a diversity of districts (all serving historically disadvantaged students in high-poverty contexts), we hypothesize that these tools will lower X’s per-unit cost for support. We also hypothesize that these tools will reduce district overhead costs, improve the cost efficiency of their programs (i.e., deliver better outcomes for historically disadvantaged students relative to the per-student cost of the programs), and increase the demand for new districts adopting the program.
Figure 4: X Co.’s High-Dosage Tutoring Cohort Model
We will invite districts to join X Co.in cohorts. Cohort 1 will have four districts; Cohort 2 and 3, each starting a year later, will add at least eight additional districts, as will Cohorts 4 and 5, each starting 2 years after Cohort 1. Through this ramping up of the cohort model we will explicitly test our ability to scale Engine 2 to serve many districts. Our goal in year three is to have twenty districts participating concurrently. At the end of this period, our first cohort of four districts will be graduating. See Table 1.

	Cohort 1	Cohort 2	Cohort 3	Cohort 4	Cohort 5	# Districts	# Schools	Revenue (000s)
Year 1	C1Y1					4	20	200
Year 2	C1Y2	C2Y1	C3Y1			12	88	1,320
Year 3	C1Y3	C2Y2	C3Y2	C4Y1	C5Y1	20	184	2,760
	Assumptions: Participating districts enroll an average of five schools each during their first cohort year and twelve in their second and third cohort years. In the first year of the Action Plan we earn (a discounted)
$10,000 in revenue per enrolled school, and $15,000 per enrolled school in years two and three of the plan.
Table 1: Projected Participation in X Co.’s Cohort Model during Its Action Plan
Within this three-year period, we are committed to serve a range of urban districts that represent U.S. public education with schools that are Title I and disportionately enroll disadvantaged youth. These districts will include large, medium and small districts from geographically diverse parts of the county. In order to ensure that this effort is successful, X Co.has internal divisions under our CEO specially organized to focus on the goals we have identified for Engine 2. We have tapped our staff that have deep expertise supporting districts with Engine 1, and will include a proven product team that has spent years developing tools for SHDT.
The Technical Assistance and Quality Assurance component of X’s Engine 2 has already started in multiple jurisdictions including Illinois and New Mexico, where X Co.was chosen as those states' math partner for HDT. In Chicago, we are supporting tutoring in 82 schools and in New Mexico, we are ramping to serve 38 schools. Early
 

indications suggest that these engagements will provide fertile ground to explore the most promising methods of infusing SHDT into the fabric of the school day.
From the pool of districts that are receiving technical assistance from us or who have procured but not yet engaged with technical assistance, we will recruit districts into the District Cohort model each Spring / Summer. It should also help to position the cohort model as a mutually beneficial way for districts to learn from each other and for us to learn from the districts and to co-design tools and systems that better serve everyone in the SHDT ecosystem. The lessons from cohorts will be codified at the conclusion of each school year, with Cohort 1 informing Cohorts 2 and 3, and Cohorts 1-3 informing Cohorts 4 and 5.
Even without formal co-design arrangements with the districts where we are currently providing technical services, we are getting valuable feedback and insight into where we can improve our systems and tools to better serve customer needs. Areas where we are already planning such improvements include:
1.	Integrated Tutor Training - Extending our existing platform for tutor training to include pathways for training that are cohort based and allow tutors to connect with others, role play, and practice mock tutorials.
2.	Math Curriculum Training - Extending our existing platform to support training on X’s math curriculum.
3.	Video Submission Options - Incorporating video submissions into our platform as a way to assess tutors understanding and provide high-value feedback.
We also hypothesize that the a la carte Technical Assistance and Quality Assurance offerings during this three year period will have natural variations in district adoptions that will allow us to explore tradeoffs between fidelity and scalability / adoptability. Studying the resulting natural variation in support should allow X Co.to identify and optimize for key tradeoffs between fidelity and scalability. Drawing from our market experience to date, a summary of core features of this program and optional services is summarized below.

Essential Services	Optional Supports
Consulting on program design	Data analysis tools and methods
Advising on sourcing of tutors and supervisors	Measures of engagement and confidence
Training of tutors and supervisors	Formative and summative assessments
Ongoing inspections for fidelity	Curriculum tailored to SHDT
	Software platform for SHDT and adaptive practice
Table 2: Overview of X Co.’s Basic Package of Services and Support
X Co.team members will provide guidance on core tutoring skills and program implementation processes and assess the quality of tutorials with our tutoring rubric. We will offer support in key areas that are vital for effective execution: The primary objective is to ensure district leaders are replicating the core (required) program hallmarks that the evidence shows will lead to success.[8] We will need to test district fidelity by using measures that we will co-develop with the districts.
H2: The District Cohort Model Will Enable the Development of Co-Designed Systems and Tools That Make SHDT and Engine 2 More Effective and Efficient
From our work with districts in the cohort model, ideas for new systems and tools will emerge to help them implement SHDT efficiently and with fidelity. We hypothesize that as we build out these co-designed systems and tools, the cost of SHDT will drop and our costs for support (on a unit basis) will also drop. We anticipate that these advances will be critical contributors to the development of sustainable economic models for SHDT.
 

AI-based systems will be an important pathway to reducing these costs during the Action Plan execution period. Promising technology (such at the TalkBack project at the University of Colorado) has been developed for the math classroom, that we plan to adapt to tutoring.[9]  With TalkBack in place to give tutors ongoing feedback and coaching, a portion of the work done by X Co.Site Directors could be offloaded to AI under a one-time investment of approximately two million dollars. This technology promises to significantly reduce the time associated with Site Director review of tutorials for feedback and coaching purposes. The Site Director position currently adds a per pupil cost of $400 to $500 in X’s programs. Therefore, if the AI for tutor feedback is in place, then the cost of replicating X’s model by districts will decline, thereby increasing the probability that it can be sustained in
post-federal-stimulus years. See Note [9] for additional details.
Based on three years of experience co-designing technology specifically to support SHDT, Figure 5 is a block diagram of the systems we will pilot with District Cohort 1. While we believe this is a solid starting framework, we will continue to co-design the new elements of this system with students from historically marginalized schools.
These systems integrate with and augment existing district infrastructure and applications with new tutoring-specific capabilities.
From this experience we are confident that the platform supporting blended tutoring will be the central component of these tools. We expect that this platform will be critical to both the online and in-person models, and we envision enhancing the in-person tutorials to seamlessly blend aspects of online and in-person through this platform.
Importantly, we believe that this program will support future district-run programs that are much like the in-person model we have deployed to date, but with considerable technological enhancements to be built and with an online integration that we now lack.
Through the pandemic, we have seen the advantage of tutors being able to work remotely and live in areas that are sustainable at a service-level salary. These advantages of online tutoring make us believe, strongly, that online tutoring will remain prevalent in SHDT models going forward. Today, however, online tutoring, even when done well, currently feels too impersonal (much like Zoom meetings). Even in X’s online tutoring platform (X Co. Connect), which provides many more interactive and engaging elements, the type of deep engagement that we observe during in-person tutoring-the laughter, high-fives, and camaraderie-is not yet present in today's online model. Contrast this with in-person classroom tutoring, which is energetic, engaging, and even slightly chaotic.
X’s next generation platform for tutoring will provide new and exciting ways for tutors and students to connect
 

online, bringing the best of 'classroom chaos' into the online space to further build and encourage relationship- and confidence-building in mathematics.
We know that the personal connection between tutors and students-the relationships that develop through shared experiences-are essential to X’s model. As such, we consider it crucial to make further investment in the online tutoring experience in order to make it as engaging as the in-person experience. We have done an initial review of state-of-the-art online tutoring technologies and believe we can do just that. Four dimensions that we hypothesize will be most important to address are: a sense of belonging, a sense of a common group, and a meaningful incentive system for youth. We are actively co-designing systems to address these concerns.[10]
H3: The Co-Designed Tools and Systems for SHDT Will Enable Broader and More Scalable Adoption of X’s Technical Assistance Services
We believe that the tools and systems that we develop through this co-design process will in turn drive improvements to our ability to deliver effective technical assistance efficiently. In the model presented in Figure 2, the first three hypotheses together form a feedback loop of continuous improvement. We believe that this continuous improvement mechanism will help to unlock the channel for scale.
We know that we cannot serve all school districts in the country, and X’s widespread impact will only be possible when other organizations and school districts can adopt and implement SHDT with fidelity. Central to this plan is that we will be able to package our people-powered (technical assistance) and our technology-supported (products) and make them broadly available. We have already seen our first steps in this direction indicate that this can be an effective strategy for lifting the field. The Boys and Girls Club has adopted X Co.Coach as their primary training tool for volunteers across the nation, and Littera has adopted and is reselling X’s 6-12 math curriculum packaged with our tutoring training. While the list will evolve, some of the products we will continue to support for 3rd party adoption are listed below. We are committed to offering a free tier for broad adoption. We will also offer premium services to cover our costs.
Online Hiring Guide – A suite of resources on how to identify and attract a diverse group of candidates that will make effective tutors.
Platform for Tutor and Supervisor Training – A platform designed to deliver X’s proven training both synchronous (live with a trainer) and asynchronously (independent learning) for tutors and coaches of tutors with additional domain specific training for Algebra I tutors.
Next Generator Online Tutoring Platform - A platform tailored for delivering high-engagement, high-dosage tutoring delivered online or in person.
Math Tutoring Curriculum - Research-backed content designed for grades 6-12. Designed for non-educator specialists to deliver exceptional academic tutoring in lock step with core classroom instruction.
Adaptive Practice World - A multi-player practice program crafted to increase student sense of belonging and confidence in math
X’s Training Platform is an extension of our current online course that covers the foundation of what it means to be an effective tutor. In this expanded version, we will support both synchronous (live training) and asynchronous (independent learning.) It will provide training specific for the needs of the tutor, but also district administration, teachers, and supervisor, and enables cohorts of tutors to be able to role-play lessons and share learnings and more. As learners move through the program, they will be rewarded for their efforts, foster their identity and participate in real-time communication with peers and experts. Furthermore, the modules will be designed to support customization of the scope and sequence to by districts and third party organizations.
 

H4: A Sustainable Community of Practice Will Emerge From the District Cohort Model
Much of our work with the District Cohort Model, as described above, is intended to facilitate the development of a community of practice that will be self-sustaining even as the model scales to more districts and X’s direct support for each participating district decreases over time. As described in Figure 5, the expectation is that districts will be able to operate their SHDT programs largely independently by year three. However, through their three years of participation in a cohort with other district leadership teams, they will have built internal capacity and internalized knowledge on a range of key topics. They will have learned through X’s facilitation and interactions with their peers to monitor and respond to key performance indicators for their SHDT programs, and will have adopted their own strategies for continuous improvement relative to these indicators. All of this should result in coherence and alignment across the districts in the cohort.
This alignment together with the relationships that will have been built across the districts through their participation in the program should produce the hypothesized, sustainable community of practice.
H5: Through the Community of Practice and the Co-Designed Tools, Practices, and Resources, DNA that Encodes X’s High-Dosage Tutoring Model Will Be Infused Into the Community of Practitioners
The ultimate goal of this Action Plan is to establish a repeatable and reliable mechanism by which X’s practices for HDT are transmitted to new generations of HDT. We are using DNA as an analogy of how key advantageous traits are conveyed to new generations and also remain stable when implemented. We hypothesize that it will be the community of practice and the set of supporting tools, practices, and resources that encode and infuse X’s
High-Dosage Tutoring Model. We do not know precisely what this encoding will look like, but we expect it will emerge from the collaborative design work done with the districts and the interactions and learnings from the cohort model and the community of practice. We are confident in the possibility of such an encoding because an example already exists within the X-run programs that have proven stable, repeatable, and reliable over many generations. We believe that the formalization of X’s practices into training resources, measures, and key performance indicators that are successfully implemented by a community of practice will be the pathway by which this DNA is distilled and infused into the community, and the essential practices of high-dosage tutoring become self-sustaining. As a success baseline for this effort, we expect at a minimum to see that the districts will be exhibiting all of the core elements of X’s model as shown in Figure 2, and that these elements will all appear to be stable and sustainable in their adoption of SHDT.
What Needs to Be Proven True
During this three-year plan, we do not believe that all of these hypotheses will need to be proven true (or, indeed, that none of these hypotheses will change), however, we do view the following set of outcomes as being essential to this Action Plans and our plans for effective and economically sustainable impact at full scale. First, we believe that we must establish a viable channel for recruiting districts into the model (which we conceptualize as H1). Second, we believe that we must find a viable pathway to working with a sufficient number of districts as co-design partners (for which we believe the cohort model and H2 are most promising). Third, a sustainable community of practice must emerge. And fourth most essentially, DNA encoding X’s high-dosage tutoring model must be infused into the community of practitioners.
SUCCESS METRICS
The indicators that we will use to evaluate our channel for impact-at-scale are primarily focused on the cohort of school districts in year one (the pilot cohort) and year two (the follow-on cohort). The key areas to measure are 1) fidelity of implementation (output measure); and 2) impact on student outcomes (outcomes measure). We will focus our learning on further evidence building in the categories below:
○	Do the participating cohort school districts implement the critical elements of SHDT listed below? With what fidelity? These questions will be revisited iteratively, with each cohort, as they gain experience with the
 

model and elements and as we refine and expand the supporting structures, systems, and platforms based on the experience and input of the cohort districts as they work with us as co-designers.
1.	The tutoring model, as implemented, matches the design parameters of the X Co.Model that are essential elements of SHDT: tutoring is provided in small groups (2-3 students); tutoring is provided 3-5 times per week, student-tutor pairings are maintained longitudinally; students receive at least 30 hours of personalized tutoring per semester; and the tutoring is implemented during the school day.
2.	The tutoring is supplemental to core academic instruction (and not considered a replacement).
3.	The tutoring curriculum is aligned with classroom instruction, and the curricula are coherent.
4.	Tutoring is data-driven, with regular formative assessments to inform instructional approaches for students
5.	Tutors receive adequate and effective pre-service training.
6.	Tutors receive ongoing and effective in-service coaching, including frequent observation and feedback.
Measures of (incremental) success that will be used throughout the Action Plan period include: :
○	Are leading indicators for those gains in alignment with those seen in X-run programs?
These are the model alignment structures described above, and we will see this on day one of tutoring.
○	Do pre- and post- testing of academic gains match the gains that are seen in X-run programs?
○	Do measures of tutor engagement, student engagement, and student-tutor alliance align with what is seen in X-run programs?
X Co. will develop qualitative and quantitative measurement plans to track the progress of district models as the districts progress through the cohort program. These plans will be designed to formatively guide the work of implementation and also to generate case studies that can be used to guide future cohorts and to inspire future work. The Urban Labs of the University of Chicago has now applied for a federal IES grant to evaluate X’s widespread work in Chicago Public Schools.
In parallel with these programmatic measures, we will apply a set of measures to study our investments in technology-supported tutoring. Central to this part of evaluation is evaluating how useful and usable the tools, platforms and online resources are for District-supported SHDT, and how they impact the feasibility of these district-supported models. We expect to see early indicators leading toward growing evidence of the efficacy of Engine 2. We'll start measuring implementation, partner engagement, tutor quality, district fidelity to our
standards--how similar does Engine 2 compare to Engine 1 on tutor background, measures of engaging students, etc. If these results are being shown, then there should be a waiting list of districts by the end of Year 3 that are eager to hire X Co and to use X’s products. If tutoring is succeeding, then we should see districts working to change their approach to budgeting, scheduling, and deploying human capital so that tutoring is established as a regular component of students' school days. We may do some "lean tests" to see, of 100 districts invited to join Cohort 1, at x price, how many do join (we have discussed with Spring Impact, and will retain that firm, as our consultant for key periods during the three years of the Action Plan).
Data from these various measurements will enable us to quickly assess whether this new channel 1) replicates the essence of our Direct Impact model and 2) provides the scalability we are seeking. This plan is grounded in our long experience running HDT and our experience over the last two years in supporting districts through technical services and online resources. Building on this strong foundation, we are optimistic that transformative change is achievable over the next decade. Milestones along the way will give us confidence that X’s model will scale-these milestones rest on the number of districts that adopt our model, and their fidelity to it.
 

Success Metrics at the End of Year Three
At the end of three years we hope to prove success under the three following key metrics that will demonstrate a clear channel for scaling X’s High-Dosage Tutoring model nationally:
1.	Evidence that there is broad and continuing demand for SHDT from districts. This evidence will come in the form of demand for our technical services sufficient to fill at least three new cohorts and ideally an additional four cohorts in the year following the conclusion of this Action Plan.
2.	Evidence that districts are willing to pay for the SHDT programs and support at a level that will lead to economic sustainability for Engine 2. This should also include evidence that the districts have a sustainable way to make those payments going forward, with (ideally) the funding becoming built into their operating budget and/or relying on stable public funding sources such as Title I.
3.	Evidence that the SHDT model is being implemented with fidelity (i.e. under the various metrics described above), particularly along dimensions theorized to be strongly coupled to student outcomes (such as the alliance between tutor their students, student sense of belonging in mathematics, confidence, perseverance, growth mindset, etc.).
At the end of year three, if we have met these metrics then we will know that we are on the right path - a path that leads to transformative change across our nation.
TEST THE PATHWAY
X’s Engine 2 is designed to open a new channel, a channel for scale. While based on an existing model, this new channel represents an unproven approach based on a number of assumptions. As part of our effort in identifying risks, Bridgespan was retained by X Co. and conducted field research and those findings are folded into this summary, and our mitigation strategies are identified:
○	Model Risk (Impact) - Watering down of the high-dosage brand: If tutoring solutions scale without adequate controls and fidelity monitoring, effectiveness may be curbed, leading to less long-term support for tutoring as part of the standard educational model. X Co. will push against this by becoming recognized as the brand leader for high impact tutoring.
○	Model Risk (Channel) - District leaders have a mismatched mindset regarding tutoring, what it means, how it works, and what's needed to implement it. X Co. will roll out a strategy to educate district leaders on effective tutoring, working with others as well.
○	Model Risk (Channel) - A direct service model may still be more attractive: Systems may continue to opt for direct service models, which are more plentiful, lead to immediate implementation, and keep long-term personnel costs low (with tutors employed by the provider). X Co. will not be able to stop districts from seeking direct providers, but will work most closely with our cohorts to train districts to do the work themselves after three years of cohort participation.
○	Market Risk - Short-term momentum wanes: COVID has put learning loss top of mind, but commitment could wane as systems return to "normal" and sun-setting federal supports create a funding cliff. X Co. will work with others to raise public awareness of the success of high quality tutoring.
○	Operational Risk - A district is not ready after a year to graduate to the next level. X Co. will create alternate pathways for districts to proceed.
○	Operational Risk - Staffing capacity: If current labor market trends persist, districts may lack the capacity to execute on new programs and/or may lack the ability to recruit high-quality program managers and tutors. X Co. will continue to demonstrate that sourcing tutors remotely is most effective.
○	Economic Risk - Districts are not willing to pay $100.00/per student/per year to participate in a cohort over three years to ultimately learn to run SHDT on their own. X Co. has some indication from our work this Spring in Chicago Public Schools, and in New Mexico (both entities issued RFPs and X Co. was awarded the grades 6-12 math trusted partnership role), that districts will pay this amount, but that assumption poses a
 

risk to our success.
○	Economic Risk-Districts may have other ideas for their stimulus and Title I funds. X Co. will work to raise district awareness of the ROI of high quality tutoring versus other Title I expenditures.
We will need to modify our Engine 2 cohort model if these risks prove out.[11]

BUDGET
The budget for the Action Plan totals about $23 million (coincidentally, our annual budget for the current FY is also
$23 million). We are seeking $10 million from FS_BM Partners to support this Action Plan.
●	Of this total $23m for the Action Plan, roughly $5.3m are one time expenses for consultants to help build out our internal systems (salesforce database to track customers, usage, effectiveness), marketing specialists (the Media Cause and WhiteBoard Advisors line items-see Note [12]. Media Cause will promote our turnkey solution, and attract districts to our cohort-also, to see what the martlet demand is by generating demand through direct media buys, and a user interface design consultant to support designing and creating platforms.
●	For personnel, we are looking to add a total of 47 positions over 3 years; the positions that merit a shorter time frame we've decided to engage as consultants.
○	Year one, we would hire 38 positions
■	Consulting TAQA, would be staffed by 6 positions.
○	1 VP of Consulting and Business Development
○	4 Directors of District Partnerships
○	1 Client Relationship Manager
●	Year 2, we would reinforce the department by hiring 4 new positions including 4 Client Relationship Managers and a Senior Director of District Partnership.
●	Year 3, we would another 6 positions: 4 CRMs and an Operations and Data Support Coordinator responsible for collecting client data and organizing cohorts along with an Engagement Coordinator
○	Engineering
■	The engineering team is currently made up of 6 Engineers, we will be looking to add 4 engineering positions and remain at 10 for the three-year action planning period.
○	Design
■	The design team is currently made up of 5 FTEs, and we will be looking to hire one additional position, a Senior User Experience Designer.
○	Operations and IT
■	The team will consist of 9 FTEs in year one and scale up to 10 in year three
○	Research and Development
■	The department today is staffed by 1 FTE; to pursue the action plan, we will add two positions in year one, an AI PostDoc and a Product Research and Development Manager. This department will remain staffed at this level for the next three years.
●	The budget includes one-time and ramp-up costs related to our cloud infrastructure and cloud operations. The scale of operations that we expect Engine 2 to deliver will require additional server leases, new software and device management tools, and more complex operations to support the breadth of software offerings:
○	$1.3m over three years with $300k year one and $500k in years two and three.
●	We seek $10 million in support from BMP; we then will seek to then fully fund the plan through these means:
○	We plan to share this plan with existing funders.
 

○	We will use our reserves to begin staffing for this plan.
○	Within our reserves, we have access to up to $15 million in unrestricted funding (Mackenzie Scott) to allocate as needed, although we do not want to tap this entire fund as it is in part operational reserves for X Co.to protect against any future changes in revenue.
CONCLUSION
This plan provides the opportunity to break the cycle of poverty for millions of young Americans. We know that postsecondary attainment is the most reliable pathway out of the bottom economic quartile; we've seen, from our 18 years leading the field of in-school tutoring, how support tailored to individual student needs can transform the futures of low-income students. We know how to build that pathway-and we have the people, the track record, and the detailed plan to co-create it with districts nationwide. We also have district and state partners ready to take on this ambitious plan. With this plan, we will knock down the barriers to widespread adoption of tutoring.
 
Category	Year 1	Year 2	Year 3
SALARIES			
Technical Assistance and Quality Assurance Team (6 growing to 16 FTEs)	
708,000	
1,143,420	
1,718,741
Engineering Team (10 FTEs)	1,369,980	1,397,380	1,425,327
Design Team (6 FTEs)	535,720	546,434	557,363
Operations and IT Team (9 growing to 10 FTEs)	885,000	857,565	920,754
Research and Development Team (3 FTEs)	289,808	295,604	301,516
Talent Acquisition and Marketing Team (5 scaling down to 3 FTEs )	
495,600	
409,224	
319,195

Total Personnel and Fringe	
4,284,108	
4,649,627	
5,242,896

 	CONSULTANTS	
Salesforce Build-Out of Data Management and
reporting	100,000	45,000	30,000
UI/UX consultant	100,000	35,000	0
Spring Impact	100,000	75,000	50,000
Salesforce integration vendor	45,000	11,250	0
Google integration vendor for account provisioning	
45,000	
0	
0
ADP integration vendor for HR - systems integration	
45,000	
0	
0
External security audit	25,000	25,000	25,000
Media Cause	2,000,000	1,500,000	1,000,000
White Board Advisors	50,000	50,000	25,000
AI Postdoc CU	125,000	127,500	130,050
Support for Recruiting Special Talent and Designing Recruitment Option for Turnkey	
100,000	
100,000	
100,000

 	OTHER	
Postage & Mailing (hardware management for
remote staff)	25,000	27,500	30,250
Cloud hosting services	150,000	165,000	181,500
Computers (new)	24,000	0	0
Computers (replacement)	45,000	45,000	45,000
Software Subscriptions	496,160	534,360	567,796
Travel	91,000	116,100	153,222
Professional Development/Training	87,000	102,280	73,586
TOTAL COST	$7,937,268	$7,608,617	$7,654,300
			
		$23,200,185	
 

NOTES & REFERENCES
[1]	Algebra, economic mobility, and racial inequality
For an extensive discussion of the relationships between Algebra 1 and economic mobility, civil rights, and systemic and persistent racial inequality in the U.S., see:
•	Robert Moses and Charles Cobb, Radical equations: Civil rights from Mississippi to the Algebra Pro}ect, 2002.
[2]	Access to education is neither fair nor equal Facts cited in this paragraph are from:
•	The United States Commission on Civil Rights (2018). "Public Education Funding Inequity in an Era of Increasing Concentration of Poverty and Resegregation."
Also, according to the National Center for Children in Poverty, approximately 29.8 million American children currently live below the poverty line. For every ten children from low-income families who enter high school, seven will graduate on time, four will enter college, and one will receive a college degree by the age of 24. And see also:
•	Mortenson, Thomas. "Bachelor's degree attainment by age 24 by family income quartiles, 1970 to 2005." Oskaloosa, IA: Postsecondary Education Opportunity (2007)
[3]	Not too late to reverse the cumulative impacts of systemic racism in our educational system
The reference here to it is "Not to Late" is to the paper:
•	Cook P, Dodge K, Farkas G, Roland G. Fryer J, Guryan J, Ludwig J, Mayer S, Pollack H, Steinberg L. (2015)
Not Too Late: Improving Academic Outcomes for Disadvantaged Youth.Northwestern University Institute for Policy Research (15-01).
See also:
•	Cook, P. J., Dodge, K., Farkas, G., Fryer, R. G., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., ... & Steinberg, L. (2014). The (surprising) efficacy of academic and behavioral intervention with disadvantaged youth: Results from a randomized experiment in Chicago (No. w19862). National Bureau of Economic Research.
•	Ander, R., Guryan, J., & Ludwig, J. (2016). Improving academic outcomes for disadvantaged students: Scaling up individualized tutorials. The Hamilton Project-Brookings.
[4]	One million students
We target the population of just over one million students annually who take Algebra 1 in a high poverty public school, defined by the U.S. Department of Education as a school in which 75% to 100% of the students are on a free or reduced price lunch program. The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) reports that 24% of all public school students attend a high poverty school and that these students are disproportionately students of color (see the annual NCES report "Concentration of Public School Students Eligible for Free or Reduced-Price Lunch," https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/clb). Forty-five percent of all Black and Latinx students attend a high poverty school and seventy percent attend either a mid-to-high or high poverty school (i.e. a school in which the majority of students are FRPL), and as previously discussed in this Action Plan, those schools are also disproportionately under funded and under resourced. With 4.2 million ninth grade students currently enrolled in public schools (source: NCES) and Algebra 1 most often being covered in ninth grade, there are approximately 0.24 x 4.2M = 1.0M students currently taking Algebra 1 in a high-poverty public school in the U.S. While there are other ways to look at the numbers and to arrive at a similarly sized population of one million priority students, we prefer this school-based approach because SHDT programs are ideally implemented on a school-wide basis. School-wide implementations of SHDT reduce concerns related to students receiving tutoring and recast it not as a form of remediation but simply a service that all students receive.
 

[5]	Vastly improved outcomes
There are two leverage points in K-12 education where the greatest gains can be garnered from student success, and where research shows the greatest gains will be had from effective interventions: reading proficiency by grade 3, and passing Algebra 1 by grade nine. Longitudinal research shows that students who achieve reading proficiency by grade three will graduate from high school nine years later at a four times higher rate than students who are not proficient in reading by grade three. Identically, students who pass Algebra 1 have a four times higher graduation rate than students who fail Algebra 1. Also, a meta-study by Roland Fryer published in 2016,1 of 196 RCTs of interventions in math and reading across age levels, shows higher effectiveness for reading interventions in lower grades versus middle or high school; and generally higher effects for late interventions in math versus interventions in math at earlier grades (graph on page 105); of special interest is that the strong X Co.results from Chicago in
2013-2015 were not yet published, so were not in Dr. Fryer's analysis but would have shifted his line of best fit for math upward at ages 14 and 15.
○	Middle school math performance is a strong predictor of future academic and professional success. Students who complete algebra by 8th grade attend college at higher rates than students who do not complete algebra.2 According to the U.S. Department of Education, 80 percent of high school dropouts cited their inability to pass Algebra 1 as the main reason for leaving school.3
○	Completing algebra early has a positive impact on highly mobile career trajectories.4 The earlier that students are able to complete algebra, the earlier they are able to move on to more advanced math coursework. This has strong implications for career trajectory, particularly the ability to pursue STEM majors in college.
○	Strong high school math accomplishment helps students avoid remedial coursework in college. Between 60 and 70 percent of entering freshmen in community colleges enroll in remedial coursework, with the majority of these students needing remediation in math. 40 percent of students in remedial courses at two-year colleges and 25 percent of students in four-year colleges do not complete their degree.
[6]	X Co.’s origin and the evolution of X’s program model
X Co. was founded as a nonprofit in 2014. It was spun off from Match Education, where Alan Safran, X’s co-founder, helped coin the phrase "high dosage tutoring" and began an in-school-day tutoring program in 2004. In the first class of students to receive the tutoring was AJ Gutierrez, who later joined Alan Safran in
co-founding X. Our first X Co.client was a high school in NYC where we served a group of 140 ninth graders. Prior to our inception, X’s co-founders had been doing this work under the Match Education umbrella, in 2012 in Lawrence, MA, in 2013 in Stamford, CT, and from 2013-2015 as a pilot project funded by philanthropy in Chicago Public Schools. As principals and school leaders in Chicago witnessed the program's success during the 2013-2014 school year, three more schools adopted the program in the 2014-2015 school year. As a result, we served a much larger population in that first CPS pilot than anticipated and the program continued to expand across the district, ultimately becoming a part of the district's annual budget in 2015 to the present.
Today, X Co.delivers its tutoring intervention in multiple models that all share a core set of practices. Tutors are selected from a pool of applicants, 85% of whom are recent college graduates (a few are associates degree holders), 10% of whom are mid-career switchers, and 5% of whom are retirees. A significant (30-50%) number of X Co.tutors

1 Fryer, R. G, "The production of human capital in developed countries: Evidence from 196 randomized field experiments" in
The Handbook of Economic Field Experiments (Vol. 2, pp. 95-322), 2015.
2 Balfanz, Herzog, and Mac Iver, "Preventing Student Disengagement and Keeping Students on the Graduation Path in Urban Middle-Grades Schools: Early Identification and Effective Interventions," Educational Psychologist 2007;
Hein, Smerdon, and Sambolt, "Predictors of Postsecondary Success," American Institutes for Research 2013
3 https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ1013968
4 U.S. Department of Education, "A Leak in the STEM Pipeline: Taking Algebra Early," 2018 https://www2.ed.gov/datastory/stem/algebra/index.html
 

are Black and Latinx, year after year and city after city, which suggests a pipeline of diverse talent is very likely to be secured for this work. Each tutor participates in pre-service training. Students-as part of their regular class
schedule-are assigned to participate in a tutoring session for one class period every day in addition to their regular math class (or a long period every other day, in schools with block scheduling). Tutors work six periods a day, and each school is overseen by a site director who handles issues of student focus in the tutoring room and communication with school staff, and provides daily feedback and ongoing coaching and professional development to the tutors. X Co.has created its own curriculum that all tutors use.
Each tutorial session has 2-3 students assigned to work live with their tutor who (in the blended model, in which tutors have two or three live, two or three additional students "assigned" to the tutor actually work on a math platform nearby, separate from the live tutorial). l follows a set routine. A student first does four to five minutes of warm-up problems before receiving 40 minutes of tutoring on material tailored to that student. Finally, the student completes one to three problems designed to assess understanding of the material covered during the class period. Frequent internal formative assessments of student progress are used to individualize instruction. In addition, X Co.site directors work with mathematics teachers on a weekly basis to understand what standards are being taught in mainstream math classes so the X Co.tutorial covers complementary concepts. X Co.tutors also discuss general study skills with students as part of the formal program (such as structuring how to approach a difficult problem by breaking it down), as well as through informal discussions. High-quality tutoring is the science and art of giving excellent directions and asking great questions in the right order, while anticipating student answers and misconceptions along the way. High-quality tutoring keeps students in the zone of proximal development; this means that the ratio of student-to-tutor working, thinking, writing, and explaining is shifted in the direction of the students, causing the tutor to stay in the role of facilitator. High-quality tutoring is centered on a strong working relationship between the tutor and his/her students. X’s motto, imbued with our organizational values, is that "students don't care how much you know until they know how much you care." This is a critical component for Black and Latinx students as a way to begin to eradicate the school to prison pipeline happening in urban schools.
The key insight behind the specific educational intervention we study here, developed by X Co., is that being a successful tutor requires fewer specialized skills and less on-the-job learning than a classroom teacher. This insight expands the applicant pool, and also means that the people hired-tutors-can be successful right away (rather than the usual three year learning curve for classroom teachers ). X Co.therefore uses a very different HR model from regular education: It hires people to tutor for just one year for a modest stipend, as a sort of public service.
[7]	Evidence of effectiveness of X’s Engine 1 (direct services) and Engine 2 (technical assistance/quality assurance consulting work):
a)	Engine 1:
○	In randomized controlled trials, researchers at the University of Chicago found that students who participated in X Co. tutoring can double or even triple the amount of math students learn in a single year.
○	X Co. has reduced disparities in grades and test scores between students from higher and lower income families by 50 percent.
○	Participants' likelihood of failing math courses fell by as much as 63 percent.
○	Course failures in non-tutored subjects have been reduced by as much as 26 percent.
○	Student attendance among X Co.students has improved by as much as 18 days per year.

b)	Engine 2: Evidence on effectiveness of X’s Technical Assistance and Quality Assurance
The strong evidence from Engine 1 (some was generated at Match HS in Boston before X Co.was founded in 2014) generated three successful consultancies (Houston, Netherlands, Providence RI). Three of the consultancies demonstrate that our pathway to scale through widespread consulting is not only possible to
 

execute-it can achieve strong results; one consultancy (Pittsburgh) shows that key parameters must be maintained.

(i) Houston (2010-2011)
In 2010, Harvard Professor Roland Fryer was hired by the Houston Independent School District, the seventh largest in the US, to manage five interventions in the twenty lowest performing schools there. He asked Match to manage one of the five-high dosage math tutoring-in sixth and ninth graders in those twenty sites. Match, which is where high-dosage tutoring began in 2004, was brought in to design and execute the selection process for tutors, train 250 tutors, and provide on-site support for the first month of the school year for tutor supervisors. Match provided tools, including sharing Match's tutorial materials with the curriculum director they hired and working closely with her to guide the use of the materials. As a result of the intervention, Dr. Fryer reported that the most effective of the five interventions was the high-dosage math tutoring. The Match team that managed the Houston consulting project included Alan Safran, who subsequently co-founded X; and Cathryn Cook, who subsequently joined X Co.as senior director of data and analytics.

(ii)	Netherlands (2015-present)
Beginning in 2015, X’s co-founders began a consulting project in the Netherlands. In 2015, Chris Dupuis, who then was teaching at an international high school in Amsterdam, joined the X Co.team as a part-time consultant. X Co.helped train the site director in Rotterdam and Amsterdam; X Co.did inspections for fidelity a dozen times over six years, in person; X Co.shared its curriculum and training materials that were then used by the program. An RCT on the Netherlands project shows a statistically strong gain for students who were tutored versus the control group there (0.6 standard deviations), strong evidence of the efficacy of X’s technical assistance/quality assurance.

(iii)	Providence RI (2021)
X Co.began consulting with Providence in 2021 after the district requested help from X Co.to urgently begin a mid-year intervention in the 2020-2021 school year. The consultation began with state and district leaders to identify the needs and systems of Providence, as well as with City Year leaders, as this program involved the district's use of City Year Members as tutors to enable such a late-stage deployment. X Co.conducted a needs assessment, which informed our decision to build out a seven-day training program. X Co.coached school- and City-Year-leaders through the process of starting a program mid-year, and facilitated the training for the City Year members. X Co.staff continue to meet with the program staff bi-weekly to provide coaching and feedback on all aspects of the program. Overall X Co.supported the building and deployment of this program in Providence through assistance with program design, sharing our curriculum and online platform for remote tutoring, providing advice on human capital, training and coaching program leaders, providing
pre-service training and in-service coaching of the tutors, and inspecting for fidelity.

(iv)	Pittsburgh (2019-2020)
Pittsburgh hired X Co.to consult on a new after-school tutoring program for grades 6-9 math. X Co.trained the tutors; licensed the X Co.tutorial curriculum and did inspections for fidelity. Importantly, X Co.did not train the supervisors and this was not an in-school-day program. The program supervisors did not welcome X’s feedback during inspections for fidelity, and little evidence was generated about the effectiveness of this
 

program. X Co.learned that key parameters need to be in place to improve the likelihood of success in consulting arrangements.
In addition, since Covid in March 2020, X Co.has engaged in technical assistance and quality assurance work with states and districts. X Co.won competitive requests for proposals from the State of New Mexico (2021) and the City of Chicago (2021) to be their trusted TA/QA partner for grades 6-12 math tutoring programs at large scale. What is most interesting about this is that both contracts provide state and district funds for X Co.to partner. Further desk research by Bridgespan indicates that there is a significant market for tutoring expansion in the US; there is some level of interest in X’s products; there is a generalized demand for support (and in the case of NM and Chicago, a specific demand); and nothing in the research is inconsistent with our action plan aiming to establish high-dosage tutoring into four of the largest Title I school districts by the end of the three year period.
[8]	Hallmarks that will lead to success
Certain elements are required in order for high impact to be achieved through tutoring, and certain elements are highly recommended but variations are possible, enumerated below. Operationally, X Co.will require districts entering the cohort to have sufficient size and reach to make X’s investment of time worthwhile-this will most often require a minimum tutor corps of 100 tutors. X Co.will ask the districts to commit in good faith to intending to stay in the cohort for three years, and to be committed to exploring how tutoring can be embedded in their districts after three years of time.
a)	Requirements
1.	Tutoring is provided ideally in groups of 2-3 students; rarely 1:1, and rarely 4+
2.	The same tutor tutors the group of students throughout the school year
3.	Tutoring is provided 3-5 times per week, or students receive at least 65 hours of personalized tutoring throughout the school year (with 130 hours as a possible maximum)
4.	Tutoring is implemented through the school day, is not a before- or after- school program, and is supplemental to core academic instruction and not a replacement for core classroom instruction.
5.	Curriculum aligns with classroom instruction or state grade-level academic standards.
6.	Tutoring is data-driven, with formative assessments to inform instructional approaches for students
7.	Thorough pre-service training.
8.	Ongoing in-service coaching for tutors, including frequent observation and feedback cycles embedded in their job (at least twice a week, more in the early stages).
b)	Recommendation

Tutors can come from many pipelines, including recent grads, mid-career switchers and retirees. So long as they receive solid pre-service training, and-most importantly-frequent in-service observation and coaching, they need not be trained educators. Current college students and even younger students can also be effective.
 

[9]	AI Supports
We hypothesize that there are several ways in which artificial intelligence and machine learning could benefit and accelerate the effort to implement X’s program at scale. In general, recent advances in AI have an unrealized potential to benefit education, and we believe that high-dosage tutoring programs, and X’s program in particular, present one of the best opportunities to begin capturing more of this potential. Major barriers to realizing the full potential impact of AI in education include the lack of high quality datasets, the complicated nature and diversity of classroom interactions, the complexities of a public education system composed of semi-autonomous districts, the need to understand and address the local learning context, and the associated challenges of implementing and testing possible solutions at scale.
X’s existing Engine 1 model provides a pathway that obviates these barriers. X Co.is already embedded in numerous large districts in a way that accounts for the local context and district complexities while maintaining a standardized program of instruction at significant scale (7,000 students). Within this program, the teaching and learning interactions happen between a tutor and a small number of students, with a high density of one-on-one interactions between tutor and student and additional one-on-one collaborations between students. The tutor-student interactions happen many times per week and across a school year. In X, almost all of these interactions are with historically underserved students. For each of those interactions, X Co.has a record of the content that was being used, the instructional goals of that content, the artifacts of the student work on the math problems that were covered, an audio transcript, and often (in the case of online tutorial) a video recording of the session. Scholars in the learning sciences have demonstrated the value of this type of multimodal data in understanding the learning process even though such data is currently only available from small laboratory-based studies. Similar use of multimodal data has recently emerged as a driving factor for next-generation AI systems across a range of domains including healthcare, autonomous driving, language translation, question answering, and financial analysis. For these reasons, X Co.is in a position to partner with leading AI researchers and to leverage new AI solutions that emerge.
We hypothesize that the benefits from AI will largely accrue in the form of human-AI collaborations and that many of these will be in the form of mechanisms that enhance the scalability of X’s tutoring model. It is clear that current-generation AI technology could provide timely and important feedback to tutors and students. One of X’s near-term goals (collaborating with researchers at the University of Colorado) is to deploy an AI-based evaluation system that will analyze recorded tutorial sessions and provide real time feedback on core aspects of X’s instructional rubric just as accurately as a human observer. By combining this analysis capability with an expert (human) tutor-trainers who deliver timely feedback to tutors, we hypothesize that we will both accelerate the tutors' professional development process, reduce the administrative burden of tedious tasks on the expert tutor-trainers, and make the tutor-training and coaching process more scalable.
[10]	Co-designing systems to address a sense of belonging, a sense of a common group, and a meaningful incentive system for youth
To illustrate this work with just one design example: A current pain point is that students are not activating their cameras, and the tutor is left trying to connect with the empty black box of the students' video feeds. We are planning to test new avatar systems, which will allow the students to portray themselves within the online domain. The interface will be modified to allow group interactions and games, giving space to focus on interpersonal experiences. This new interface will allow us to also showcase written communication in a way that is equal to spoken communication. A rewards and badging system, tied to the avatar system, that the tutor can use to incentivize behaviors that contribute to the group dynamics.
[11]	Test the pathways
Model Risk (Impact) - Watering down of high-dosage brand: If tutoring solutions scale without adequate controls and fidelity monitoring, effectiveness may be curbed, leading to less long-term support for tutoring as part of the
 

standard educational model.
Model Risk (Channel) - District leaders have a mismatched mindset regarding tutoring, what it means, how it works, and what's needed to implement it.
They sign on and then start to erode the list of requirements. We have witnessed this in Engine 1. For example, districts don't realize they have to change their schedule, etc.
Hypothesis: By shifting mindsets early on with targeted district leaders, we can yield high-fidelity implementations.
Experiment: Use an assessment tool to assess the mindsets of districts who are most interested in implementation. Run focus group with districts who have already begun implementing Engine 2. (E.g., what do they wish they knew heading in that they didn't? How were expectations misaligned?) Then provide an intervention to see if we can measure a shift in mindsets and deep understandings of what high-dosage tutoring implementation really looks like compared to Engine 1 districts.
Model Risk (Channel) - A direct service model may still be more attractive: Systems may continue to opt for direct service models, which are more plentiful, lead to immediate implementation, and keep long-term personnel costs low (with tutors employed by the provider).
Market Risk - Short-term momentum wanes: COVID has put learning loss top of mind, but commitment could wane as systems return to "normal" and sun-setting federal supports create a funding cliff.
Operational Risk - A district is not ready after a year to graduate to the next level.
After Year 1, a district might not be ready to graduate to the next level of gradual release. We will need to use our evaluation methods to determine what our recommended level of support could/should be. Perhaps they stay with their cohort but still receive more direct support if they didn't get it right enough in Year 1.
As one example, identifying and hiring the right talent is a large and complex undertaking. We hire for intercultural competence, math fluency and ability to connect well with others. "Math fluency" is distinct from math content knowledge, because being good at math yourself does not make you fluent in a math learning space with students. Finally, the ability to connect with students and form relationships is critical.

Operational Risk - Staffing capacity: If current labor market trends persist, districts may lack the capacity to execute on new programs and/or may lack the ability to recruit high-quality program managers and tutors.
Economic Risk - Districts are not willing to pay $100.00/per student/per year to participate in a cohort over three years to ultimately learn to run SHDT on their own. We have some indication from our work this Spring in Chicago Public Schools, in New Mexico that Districts will pay this amount, but that assumption poses a risk to our success.
[12]	Generating market demand

Media Cause and White Board advisors are central to X’s overall efforts to cultivate a channel for growth. Media cause is responsible for our digital marketing campaigns for paid media and organic social and will support much of our "lean start up" rapid market testing. Specifically, they will provide competitive and ongoing audience analysis to help shape campaign strategy management (i.e. a/v testing, data and analytics, email strategy, SEO, creative and content production). They will develop consumer insights which will help shape our approach to ux/ui design on X’s website as well as the development of our technology.
WhiteBoard Advisors is a strategic PR firm that supports X Co.with state-level advocacy and strategic communications. They will provide support with earned media and relationships with reporters, influencers and think tanks, and are responsible for scheduling, publishing, and distribution of PR content.
 

Both organization will support how we engage national associations of state and district/local leaders (i.e. CCSSO, NGA, NSBA, AASA, ECS, CGCS, Chiefs for Change, Digital Promise, NCSL, US Conference of Mayors), aligned advocacy groups (e.g. 50Can, yes. every kid, Democrats for Education Reform, Conservative Education Reform Network, Stand for Children), and state influencers (e.g.chambers of commerce, state school administrator associations, and state advocacy and education reform networks like TN SCORE, CO Succeeds) in support of advancing awareness about X Co.services.
